docs: ui.picker (#705)
deephaven/deephaven-plugins: plugins/ui/docs/components/picker.md

# Picker

> Picker enables user to pick an option from a collapsible list of options, often used when the space is limited.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`picker` enables users to pick an option from a collapsible list of options, often used when the space is limited.
```
or The `picker` component enables...

Author: I am not sure if we would want to do `picker` here, since that would be inconsistent with what @dsmmcken did with the Button docs, I think changing it to "Pickers" is more appropriate?

## Example

```python
from deephaven import ui

@ui.component
def picker():
    option, set_option = use_state("")

    return ui.picker(
        "Rarely",
        "Sometimes",
        "Always",
        label="Choose frequency",
        on_selection_change=set_option,
    )

result = picker()
```

> ## UI Recommendations

Reviewer 2: Titles should all be be sentence case.

Recommendations for creating clear and effective buttons:

> 1. Every picker should have a label specified, without one, the picker is both ambiguous and not accessible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Every picker should have a [label](#labeling) specified. Without one, the picker is ambiguous and not accessible.
```

I might stop at "the picker is ambiguous" since accessible has two meanings.

Author: I guess it would definitely not be accessible in terms of a user's ability to access the picker, but in terms of aria accessibility, may not actually impact. I agree, will stop at "the picker is ambiguous"

> 2. In the rare case that context is sufficient, and thus, the label is not neccessary, make sure to still include an aria-label via the `aria_label` prop.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. In the rare case that context is sufficient the label is unnecesary, you must still include an aria-label via the `aria_label` prop.
```

> 3. Options in the picker should be kept short and concise, multiple lines is strongly discouraged.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Options in the picker should be kept short and concise; multiple lines are strongly discouraged.
```

> 4. The width of the picker should be set such that the field button should not intefere with the options being displayed in full.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. The picker's width should be set so that the field button does not prevent options being displayed in full.
```

5. The label, menu items, and placeholder text should all be in sentence case.

> 6. Identify the minority of picker's in a form (optional or required) and either mark fields as `is_required`, or use the `necessity_indicator` to mark as optional, based on whichever occurs less.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. Identify which pickers are required or optional, and use the `is_required` field or the `necessity_indicator` to mark them accordingly.  
```

> 7. A picker's help text should provide actionable guidance on what to select and how to select it, offering additional context without repeating the label, and should only be included if relevant to the user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7. A picker's help text should provide actionable guidance on what to select and how to select it, offering additional context without repeating the label. 
```

Reviewer: Doesn't seem necessary. Or:

"If relevant to the user, a picker's help text should provide...."

> Recommendations for creating clear and effective pickers:
> 
> 1. Every picker should have a [label](#labeling) specified. Without one, the picker is ambiguous.
> 2. In the rare case that context is sufficient the label is unnecesary, you must still include an aria-label via the `aria_label` prop.
> 3. Options in the picker should be kept short and concise; multiple lines are strongly discouraged.
> 4. The picker's width should be set so that the field button does not prevent options being displayed in full.
> 5. The label, menu items, and placeholder text should all be in sentence case.
> 6. Identify which pickers are required or optional, and use the `is_required` field or the `necessity_indicator` to mark them accordingly.  
> 7. A picker's help text should provide actionable guidance on what to select and how to select it, offering additional context without repeating the label.
> 8. When an error occurs, the help text specified in a picker is replaced by error text; thus, ensure both help and error text convey the same essential information to maintain consistent messaging and prevent loss of critical details.
> 9. Write error messages in a clear, concise, and helpful manner, guiding users to resolve the issue without ambiguity; ideally, they should be 1-2 short, complete sentences.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Recommendations for creating pickers:

1. Every picker should have a [label](#labeling) specified. Without one, the picker is ambiguous. In the rare case that context is sufficient the label is unnecessary, you should still include an aria-label via the `aria_label` prop.
2. Options in the picker should be kept short and concise; multiple lines are strongly discouraged.
3. The picker's width should be set so that the field button does not prevent options being displayed in full.
4. The label, menu items, and placeholder text should all be in sentence case.
5. A picker's help text should provide actionable guidance on what to select and how to select it, offering additional context without repeating the label.
6. When an error occurs, the help text specified in a picker should be replaced by error text.
7. Write error messages in concise and helpful manner, guiding users to resolve the issue. Error text should be 1-2 short, complete sentences ending with a period.
```

Reviewer 2: Shortened it up a bit.

## Labeling

> The picker can be labeled using the `label` prop, and if no label is provided, an `aria_label` msut be provided to identify the control for accessibility purposes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The picker can be labeled using the `label` prop. If no label is provided, an `aria_label` must be provided to identify the control for accessibility purposes.
```

```python
from deephaven import ui

option, set_option = ui.use_state("Option 2")

@ui.component
def label_variants():
    return [
        ui.picker(
            ui.item("Option 1"),
            ui.item("Option 2"),
            ui.item("Option 3"),
            label="Pick an option",
        ),
        ui.picker(
            ui.item("Option 1"),
            ui.item("Option 2"),
            ui.item("Option 3"),
            ui.item("Option 4"),
            aria_label="Pick an option",
        ),
    ]

label_examples = label_variants()
```

> The `is_required` prop and the `necessary_indicator` props can be used to show whether selecting an option in the picker is required or option.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `is_required` prop and the `necessary_indicator` props can be used to show whether selecting an option in the picker is required or optional.
```

When the `necessity_indicator` prop is set to "label", a localized string will be generated for "(required)" or "(optional)" automatically.

```python
from deephaven import ui

option, set_option = ui.use_state("Option 2")

@ui.component
def required_variants():
    return [
        ui.picker(
            ui.item("Option 1"),
            ui.item("Option 2"),
            ui.item("Option 3"),
            label="Pick an option",
            is_required=True,
        ),
        ui.picker(
            ui.item("Option 1"),
            ui.item("Option 2"),
            ui.item("Option 3"),
            ui.item("Option 4"),
            label="Pick an option",
            is_required=True,
            necessary_indicator="label",
        ),
        ui.picker(
            ui.item("Option 1"),
            ui.item("Option 2"),
            ui.item("Option 3"),
            ui.item("Option 4"),
            label="Pick an option",
            necessary_indicator="label",
        ),
    ]

required_examples = required_variants()
```

## Selection

> In a picker, a selected option can be set using the `default_selected_key` or `selected_key` prop.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a picker, the `default_selected_key` or `selected_key` props set a selected option.
```

```python
from deephaven import ui

option, set_option = ui.use_state("Option 2")

@ui.component
def selected_key_variants():
    return [
        ui.picker(
            ui.item("Option 1"),
            ui.item("Option 2"),
            ui.item("Option 3"),
            default_selected_key="Option 2",
            label="Pick an option (uncontrolled)",
        ),
        ui.picker(
            ui.item("Option 1"),
            ui.item("Option 2"),
            ui.item("Option 3"),
            ui.item("Option 4"),
            selected_key=option,
            on_selection_change=set_option,
            label="Pick an option (controlled)",
        ),
    ]

selected_keys_example = selected_key_variants()
```

## HTML Forms

> Picker's can support a `name` prop for integration with HTML form, allowing for easy identification of a value on form submission.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pickers can support a `name` prop for integration with an HTML form, allowing for easy identification of a value on form submission.
```

```python
from deephaven import ui

picker_name_example = ui.form(
    ui.flex(ui.picker(ui.item("Option 1"), ui.item("Option 2"), name="Sample Name"))
)
```

## Sections

> Picker supports sections in order to group options. Sections can be used by wrapping groups of items in a Section element. Each Section takes a title and key prop.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Picker supports sections to group options. Sections can be used by wrapping groups of items in a `section` element. Each section takes a title and key prop.
```

```python
from deephaven import ui

picker_name_example = ui.picker(
    ui.section(ui.item("Option 1"), ui.item("Option 2"), title="Section 1"),
    ui.section(ui.item("Option 3"), ui.item("Option 4"), title="Section 2"),
)
```

## Events

The Picker component supports selection through mouse, keyboard, and touch inputs via the `on_selection_change` prop, which receives the selected key as an argument.

```python
from deephaven import ui

value, set_value = use_state("")

picker_events_example = ui.picker(
    ui.section(ui.item("Option 1"), ui.item("Option 2"), title="Section 1"),
    on_selection_change=set_value,
)
```

> ## Complex Items

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Complex items
```

> Items within a Picker can include additional content to better convey options. You can add icons, avatars, and descriptions to the children of an `ui.item`. When adding a description, set the `slot` prop to "description", in order to differentiate between the text elements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Items within a picker can include additional content to better convey options. You can add icons, avatars, and descriptions to the children of an `ui.item`. When adding a description, set the `slot` prop to "description" to differentiate between the text elements.
```

```python
from deephaven import ui

complex_items_picker_example = ui.picker(
    ui.item(
        ui.icon("vsGithubAlt"),
        ui.text("Github"),
        ui.text("Github Option", slot="description"),
    ),
    ui.item(
        ui.icon("vsAzureDevops"),
        ui.text("Azure"),
        ui.text("Azure Option", slot="description"),
    ),
)
```

## Loading

> The picker has the `is_loading` prop that will display a progress a circle when in use, which could be used to give immediate visual feedback to users, indicating that the picker is loading or processing data. It will also prevent users from interacting with the picker while data is loading, avoiding potential bad states.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `is_loading` prop displays a progress circle indicating that the picker is loading or processing data, which can be used to give immediate visual feedback to users. It also prevents users from interacting with the picker while data is loading, avoiding potential bad states.
```

```python
from deephaven import ui

loading, set_loading = ui.use_state("loading")

picker_loading_example = ui.form(
    ui.picker(
        ui.section(ui.item("Option 1"), ui.item("Option 2"), title="Section 1"),
    ),
    is_loading=True if loading == "loading" else False,
)
```

## Validation

> The picker has the `is_required` prop in order to ensure that the user selects an option, and also has the `validation_behaviour` prop, that allows the user to specify aria or native verification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `is_required` prop ensures that the user selects an option. The related `validation_behaviour` prop allows the user to specify aria or native verification.
```

```python
from deephaven import ui

picker_validation_example = ui.form(
    ui.picker(
        ui.section(ui.item("Option 1"), ui.item("Option 2"), title="Section 1"),
        ui.section(ui.item("Option 3"), ui.item("Option 4"), title="Section 2"),
    ),
    validation_behaviour="aria",
)
```

## Label alignment and position

> By default, the position of a picker's label is above the picker, but it can be changed to the side using the `label_position` prop. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, the position of a picker's label is above the picker, but it can be moved to the side using the `label_position` prop. 
```

# Picker

Pickers enable users to pick an option from a collapsible list of options, often used when the space is limited.

## Example

```python
from deephaven import ui

@ui.component
def picker():
    option, set_option = use_state("")

    return ui.picker(
        "Rarely",
        "Sometimes",
        "Always",
        label="Choose frequency",
        on_selection_change=set_option,
    )

result = picker()
```

## UI recommendations

Recommendations for creating pickers:

> 1. Every picker should have a [label](#labeling) specified. Without one, the picker is ambiguous. In the rare case that context is sufficient the label is unnecessary, you should still include an aria-label via the `aria_label` prop.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Every picker should have a [label](#labeling) specified. Without one, the picker is ambiguous. In the rare case that context is sufficient, the label is unnecessary; you must still include an aria-label via the `aria_label` prop.
```

2. Options in the picker should be kept short and concise; multiple lines are strongly discouraged.
3. The picker's width should be set so that the field button does not prevent options being displayed in full.
4. The label, menu items, and placeholder text should all be in sentence case.
5. A picker's help text should provide actionable guidance on what to select and how to select it, offering additional context without repeating the label.
6. When an error occurs, the help text specified in a picker should be replaced by error text.

> 7. Write error messages in concise and helpful manner, guiding users to resolve the issue. Error text should be 1-2 short, complete sentences ending with a period.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7. Write error messages in a concise and helpful manner, guiding users to resolve the issue. Error text should be 1-2 short, complete sentences ending with a period.
```

## Data sources

For pickers, you can use a `ui.item_table_source` to dynamically derive the options from a table. This allows the picker to display selections based on the data within the specified table.

```python
from deephaven import ui, empty_table

icon_names = ["vsAccount"]
columns = [
    "Id=new Integer(ii)",
    "Display=new String(`Display `+i)",
    "Icon=(String) icon_names[0]",
]
_column_types = empty_table(20).update(columns)

item_table_source = ui.item_table_source(
    _column_types,
    key_column="Id",
    label_column="Display",
    icon_column="Icon",
)

picker_table_source_example = ui.picker(

>     item_table_source, aria_label="Picker", default_selected_key=15

Reviewer 3: You should use the `label` prop instead of `aria_label` here. It's more user friendly, and `aria_label` is only required if you don't provide the label.

)
```

> 

Reviewer 2: I would split these examples into two separate sub examples:

1. Using a straight table (no item_table_source). It's important to show that. See: https://github.com/deephaven/deephaven-plugins/blob/main/plugins/ui/docs/README.md#picker-table

I would use dx.data.stocks as the data source. It's important to mention that under this scenario it uses the first column as the key and the label and that any duplicate keys will cause the component to throw. If you are using values that maybe duplicative, then you can select_distinct first.

```
_stock_syms = dx.data.stocks().select_distinct("Sym")

ui.picker(_stock_syms, ...)
```

2. Explain for your example here that if you wish to manually specify keys and labels, you can use item_table_source which also allows per row icons.

I would use the column names Key, Label and Icon for the table being created.

@bmingles anything else critical to mention?

Reviewer 3: I agree with @dsmmcken here. I'm sure the column names were copied from one of my earlier examples, but they would be less confusing to be named for the props they are intended to source. I would also suggest the `ui_` and `my_` prefix convention of:

```python
def ui_picker_some_label():
  return ui.picker(...)

my_picker_some_label = ui_picker_some_label()
```

with optional `_some_label` suffix to differentiate examples.

## Labeling

The picker can be labeled using the `label` prop, and if no label is provided, an `aria_label` must be provided to identify the control for accessibility purposes.

```python
from deephaven import ui

option, set_option = ui.use_state("Option 2")

@ui.component
def label_variants():
    return [
        ui.picker(
            ui.item("Option 1"),
            ui.item("Option 2"),
            ui.item("Option 3"),
            label="Pick an option",
        ),
        ui.picker(
            ui.item("Option 1"),
            ui.item("Option 2"),
            ui.item("Option 3"),
            ui.item("Option 4"),
            aria_label="Pick an option",
        ),
    ]

label_examples = label_variants()
```

The `is_required` prop and the `necessary_indicator` props can be used to show whether selecting an option in the picker is required or optional.

> When the `necessity_indicator` prop is set to "label", a localized string will be generated for "(required)" or "(optional)" automatically.

Reviewer 3: Do we actually support this? I get an error when using it:

<img width="573" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/52947ab7-fbd1-43aa-b646-80f80736ef22">

Author: That's a typo, should be necessity_indicator **

Reviewer 3: Looks like this should be `necessity_indicator`

```python
from deephaven import ui

> option, set_option = ui.use_state("Option 2")

Reviewer 3: This doesn't seem to be used by the component

@ui.component
def required_variants():
    return [
        ui.picker(
            ui.item("Option 1"),
            ui.item("Option 2"),
            ui.item("Option 3"),
            label="Pick an option",
            is_required=True,
        ),
        ui.picker(
            ui.item("Option 1"),
            ui.item("Option 2"),
            ui.item("Option 3"),
            ui.item("Option 4"),
            label="Pick an option",
            is_required=True,

>             necessary_indicator="label",

Reviewer 3: `necessity_indicator`

        ),
        ui.picker(
            ui.item("Option 1"),
            ui.item("Option 2"),
            ui.item("Option 3"),
            ui.item("Option 4"),
            label="Pick an option",

>             necessary_indicator="label",

Reviewer 3: `necessity_indicator`

        ),
    ]

required_examples = required_variants()
```

## Selection

In a picker, the `default_selected_key` or `selected_key` props set a selected option.

```python
from deephaven import ui

option, set_option = ui.use_state("Option 2")

@ui.component
def selected_key_variants():
    return [
        ui.picker(
            ui.item("Option 1"),
            ui.item("Option 2"),
            ui.item("Option 3"),
            default_selected_key="Option 2",
            label="Pick an option (uncontrolled)",
        ),
        ui.picker(
            ui.item("Option 1"),
            ui.item("Option 2"),
            ui.item("Option 3"),
            ui.item("Option 4"),
            selected_key=option,
            on_selection_change=set_option,
            label="Pick an option (controlled)",
        ),
    ]

selected_keys_example = selected_key_variants()
```

## HTML Forms

> Pickers can support a `name` prop for integration with HTML form, allowing for easy identification of a value on form submission.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pickers can support a `name` prop for integration with HTML forms, allowing for easy identification of a value on form submission.
```

```python
from deephaven import ui

picker_name_example = ui.form(
    ui.flex(ui.picker(ui.item("Option 1"), ui.item("Option 2"), name="Sample Name"))
)
```

## Sections

> Picker supports sections to group options. Sections can be used by wrapping groups of items in a `section` element. Each section takes a `title` and `key` prop.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Picker supports sections that group options. Sections can be used by wrapping groups of items in a `section` element. Each section takes a `title` and `key` prop.
```

```python
from deephaven import ui

value, set_value = use_state("")

picker_events_example = ui.picker(
    ui.section(ui.item("Option 1"), ui.item("Option 2"), title="Section 1"),
    on_selection_change=set_value,
)
```

## Complex items

Items within a picker can include additional content to better convey options. You can add icons, avatars, and descriptions to the children of an `ui.item`. When adding a description, set the `slot` prop to "description" to differentiate between the text elements.

```python
from deephaven import ui

complex_items_picker_example = ui.picker(
    ui.item(
        ui.icon("vsGithubAlt"),
        ui.text("Github"),
        ui.text("Github Option", slot="description"),
    ),
    ui.item(
        ui.icon("vsAzureDevops"),
        ui.text("Azure"),
        ui.text("Azure Option", slot="description"),
    ),
)
```

## Loading

The `is_loading` prop displays a progress circle indicating that the picker is loading or processing data, which can be used to give immediate visual feedback to users. It also prevents users from interacting with the picker while data is loading, avoiding potential bad states.

```python
from deephaven import ui

> loading, set_loading = ui.use_state("loading")

Reviewer 3: This example throws an error. I don't think you use `use_state`  outside of a component.

picker_loading_example = ui.form(
    ui.picker(
        ui.section(ui.item("Option 1"), ui.item("Option 2"), title="Section 1"),
    ),
    is_loading=True if loading == "loading" else False,
)
```

## Validation

The `is_required` prop ensures that the user selects an option. The related `validation_behaviour` prop allows the user to specify aria or native verification.

```python
from deephaven import ui

> picker_validation_example = ui.form(

Reviewer 3: This example throws an error

    ui.picker(
        ui.section(ui.item("Option 1"), ui.item("Option 2"), title="Section 1"),
        ui.section(ui.item("Option 3"), ui.item("Option 4"), title="Section 2"),
    ),
    validation_behaviour="aria",
)
```

## Label alignment and position

By default, the position of a picker's label is above the picker, but it can be moved to the side using the `label_position` prop.

> When positioned on the side, the `label_align` property can be set to "start", referring to the leftmost edge of the picker, or to "end, referring to the rightmost edge.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When positioned on the side, the `label_align` property can be set to "start", referring to the leftmost edge of the picker, or to "end", referring to the rightmost edge.
```

```python
from deephaven import ui

> @ui.component

Reviewer 3: This example throws an error

```python
from deephaven import ui

picker_is_quiet_example = ui.picker(
    ui.section(ui.item("Option 1"), ui.item("Option 2"), title="Section 1"),
    is_quiet=True,
)
```

## Disabled state

The `is_disabled` prop disables a picker to prevent user interaction. This is useful when the picker should be visible but not available for selection.

```python
from deephaven import ui

picker_is_disabled_example = ui.picker(
    ui.section(ui.item("Option 1"), ui.item("Option 2"), title="Section 1"),
    is_disabled=True,
)
```

## Help text

A picker can have both a `description` and an `error_message`. The description remains visible at all times, except when the `validation_state` is set to "invalid" and an error message is present. Use the error message to offer specific guidance on how to correct the input.

```python
from deephaven import ui

@ui.component
def picker_help_text_props():
    return [
        ui.picker(
            ui.section(ui.item("Option 1"), ui.item("Option 2"), title="Section 1"),
            label="Sample Label",

>             default_value="Awesome!",

Reviewer 3: `default_value` and `validation_state` throws errors

    return [
        ui.picker(
            ui.section(ui.item("Option 1"), ui.item("Option 2"), title="Section 1"),
            width="size-3600",
        ),
        ui.picker(
            ui.section(ui.item("Option 1"), ui.item("Option 2"), title="Section 1"),
            width="size-3600",
            max_width="100%",
        ),
    ]

picker_width_props = picker_width_props()
```

## Align and direction

The `align` prop sets the text alignment of the options in the picker, while the `direction` prop specifies which direction the menu will open.

```python
from deephaven import ui

@ui.component
def picker_alignment_direction_props():
    return [
        ui.picker(
            ui.section(ui.item("Option 1"), ui.item("Option 2"), title="Section 1"),
            align="end",
        ),
        ui.picker(
            ui.section(ui.item("Option 1"), ui.item("Option 2"), title="Section 1"),
            direction="top",
        ),
    ]

picker_alignment_direction_example = picker_alignment_direction_props()
```

## Menu state

The open state of the picker menu can be controlled through the `is_open` and `default_open` props.

```python
from deephaven import ui

> open, set_open = ui.use_state(False)

Reviewer 3: Invalid outside of component. This throws an error.

def picker_label_position_props():
    return [
        ui.picker(
            ui.section(ui.item("Option 1"), ui.item("Option 2"), title="Section 1"),
            label="Test Label",
        ),
        ui.picker(
            ui.section(ui.item("Option 1"), ui.item("Option 2"), title="Section 1"),
            label="Test Label",
            label_position="side",
        ),
    ]

picker_label_position_alignment_example = picker_label_position_alignment_props()
```

## Quiet state

The `is_quiet` prop makes a picker "quiet". This can be useful when the picker and its corresponding styling should not distract users from surrounding content.

```python
from deephaven import ui

picker_is_quiet_example = ui.picker(
    ui.section(ui.item("Option 1"), ui.item("Option 2"), title="Section 1"),
    is_quiet=True,
)
```

## Disabled state

The `is_disabled` prop disables a picker to prevent user interaction. This is useful when the picker should be visible but not available for selection.

```python
from deephaven import ui

picker_is_disabled_example = ui.picker(
    ui.section(ui.item("Option 1"), ui.item("Option 2"), title="Section 1"),
    is_disabled=True,
)
```

## Help text

> A picker can have both a `description` and an `error_message`. The description remains visible at all times, use the error message to offer specific guidance on how to correct the input.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A picker can have both a `description` and an `error_message`. The description remains visible at all times. Use the error message to offer specific guidance on how to correct the input.
```

# Picker

Pickers enable users to pick an option from a collapsible list of options, often used when the space is limited.

## Example

```python
from deephaven import ui

@ui.component
def picker():

>     option, set_option = use_state("")

Reviewer 3: Needs `ui.` prefix

Reviewer 3: also, `option` isn't actually used

        ui.text("Azure Option", slot="description"),
        text_value="Azure",
    ),
)
```

## Loading

The `is_loading` prop displays a progress circle indicating that the picker is loading or processing data, which can be used to give immediate visual feedback to users. It also prevents users from interacting with the picker while data is loading, avoiding potential bad states.

```python
from deephaven import ui

@ui.component
def ui_picker_loading_example():
    loading, set_loading = ui.use_state("loading")
    return ui.form(
        ui.picker(
            ui.section(ui.item("Option 1"), ui.item("Option 2"), title="Section 1"),
            is_loading=True if loading == "loading" else False,
        )
    )

my_picker_loading_example = ui_picker_loading_example()
```

## Validation

The `is_required` prop ensures that the user selects an option. The related `validation_behaviour` prop allows the user to specify aria or native verification.

```python
from deephaven import ui

@ui.component
def ui_picker_validation_behaviour_example():
    return ui.form(
        ui.picker(
            ui.section(ui.item("Option 1"), ui.item("Option 2"), title="Section 1"),

>             validation_behavior="aria",

Reviewer 3: It's not clear to me what this actually does. There should be some description of the expected behavior, or if possible, the example should show it when you run it.

def ui_picker_label_position_examples():
    return [
        ui.picker(
            ui.section(ui.item("Option 1"), ui.item("Option 2"), title="Section 1"),
            label="Test Label",
        ),
        ui.picker(
            ui.section(ui.item("Option 1"), ui.item("Option 2"), title="Section 1"),
            label="Test Label",
            label_position="side",
        ),
    ]

my_picker_label_position_examples = ui_picker_label_position_examples()
```

## Quiet state

The `is_quiet` prop makes a picker "quiet". This can be useful when the picker and its corresponding styling should not distract users from surrounding content.

```python
from deephaven import ui

my_picker_is_quiet_example = ui.picker(
    ui.section(ui.item("Option 1"), ui.item("Option 2"), title="Section 1"),
    is_quiet=True,
)
```

## Disabled state

The `is_disabled` prop disables a picker to prevent user interaction. This is useful when the picker should be visible but not available for selection.

```python
from deephaven import ui

my_picker_is_disabled_example = ui.picker(
    ui.section(ui.item("Option 1"), ui.item("Option 2"), title="Section 1"),
    is_disabled=True,
)
```

## Help text

> A picker can have both a `description` and an `error_message`. The description remains visible at all times. Use the error message to offer specific guidance on how to correct the input.

Reviewer 3: The picker can have both props set, but only one will ever be visible, so the description is not actually visible at all times. I would change this to clarify how the `is_invalid` value affects the output. It might also be good to show both props being set with `is_invalid=False` to show the description when no error is present.

def ui_picker_width_examples():
    return [
        ui.picker(
            ui.section(ui.item("Option 1"), ui.item("Option 2"), title="Section 1"),
            width="size-3600",
        ),
        ui.picker(
            ui.section(ui.item("Option 1"), ui.item("Option 2"), title="Section 1"),
            width="size-3600",
            max_width="100%",
        ),
    ]

my_picker_width_examples = ui_picker_width_examples()
```

## Align and direction

The `align` prop sets the text alignment of the options in the picker, while the `direction` prop specifies which direction the menu will open.

```python
from deephaven import ui

@ui.component
def ui_picker_alignment_direction_examples():
    return ui.view(
        ui.flex(
            ui.picker(
                ui.section(ui.item("Option 1"), ui.item("Option 2"), title="Section 1"),
                align="end",
                menu_width="size-3000",
            ),
            ui.picker(
                ui.section(ui.item("Option 1"), ui.item("Option 2"), title="Section 1"),
                direction="top",
            ),
            gap="size-150",
            direction="column",
        ),
        padding=40,
    )

> my_picker_alignment_direction_examples = ui_picker_alignment_direction_examples()

Reviewer 3: I don't see any difference in how the `direction="top"` is different than the default. Might want to set it to a different value.

```

## Menu state

The open state of the picker menu can be controlled through the `is_open` and `default_open` props.

```python
from deephaven import ui

@ui.component
def ui_picker_open_state_examples():
    open, set_open = ui.use_state(False)
    return [
        ui.picker(
            ui.section(ui.item("Option 1"), ui.item("Option 2"), title="Section 1"),
            is_open=open,
            on_open_change=set_open,
        ),
        ui.picker(
            ui.section(ui.item("Option 1"), ui.item("Option 2"), title="Section 1"),
            default_open=True,
        ),
    ]

my_picker_open_state_examples = ui_picker_open_state_examples()
```

## API Reference

```{eval-rst}

> .. dhautofunction:: deephaven.ui.picker

Reviewer 3: I've not seen this yet. What does it do?

Author: I will defer to @dsmmcken , I had included this as a way to follow the format from his original Button Docs he put up. I would assume there is something to do with showing all of the props?

Reviewer 2: when compiled, it inserts the generated autodoc table

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/4c7659f5-ee52-4762-9e09-0b63c6d8788d)

> .. dhautofunction:: deephaven.ui.picker

Reviewer 4: Since I see you have a new `dhautofunction` here, please either

1. Create the docs locally and verify they are created correctly (the easiest way to do this is via `tools/plugin_builder.py`, check out the readme and let me know if you have problems).
2. Wait until https://github.com/deephaven/deephaven-plugins/pull/719 is merged then merge main in to this branch so the docs will be checked automatically
Thanks

        "Always",
        label="Choose frequency",
        selected_key=option,
        on_selection_change=set_option,
    )

my_picker_basic = ui_picker_basic()
```

## UI recommendations

Recommendations for creating pickers:

1. Every picker should have a [label](#labeling) specified. Without one, the picker is ambiguous. In the rare case that context is sufficient, the label is unnecessary; you must still include an aria-label via the `aria_label` prop.
2. Options in the picker should be kept short and concise; multiple lines are strongly discouraged.
3. The picker's width should be set so that the field button does not prevent options being displayed in full.
4. The label, menu items, and placeholder text should all be in sentence case.
5. A picker's help text should provide actionable guidance on what to select and how to select it, offering additional context without repeating the label.
6. When an error occurs, the help text specified in a picker should be replaced by error text.
7. Write error messages in a concise and helpful manner, guiding users to resolve the issue. Error text should be 1-2 short, complete sentences ending with a period.

## Data sources

> For pickers, we can use a Deephaven table as a data source to populate the options. When using a table, it automatically uses the first column as both the key and label. If there are any duplicate keys, an error will be thrown; to avoid this, a `select_distinct` can be used on the table prior to using it as a picker data source.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can use a Deephaven table as a data source to populate the options for pickers. A table automatically uses the first column as both the key and label. If there are duplicate keys, an error will be thrown; to avoid this, a `select_distinct` can be used on the table before using it as a picker data source.
```

```python
from deephaven import ui
from deephaven.plot import express as dx

stocks = dx.data.stocks().select_distinct("Sym")

my_picker_table_source_example = ui.picker(stocks, label="Stock Symbol Picker")
```

> If you wish to manually specify the keys and labels, you can use a  `ui.item_table_source` to dynamically derive the options from a table. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you wish to specify the keys and labels manually, you can use a  `ui.item_table_source` to dynamically derive the options from a table. 
```

```python
from deephaven import ui, empty_table

icon_names = ["vsAccount"]
columns = [
    "Key=new Integer(i)",
    "Label=new String(`Display `+i)",
    "Icon=(String) icon_names[0]",
]
column_types = empty_table(20).update(columns)

item_table_source = ui.item_table_source(
    column_types,
    key_column="Key",
    label_column="Label",
    icon_column="Icon",
)

my_picker_item_table_source_example = ui.picker(item_table_source, label="User Picker")
```

## Labeling

> The picker can be labeled using the `label` prop, and if no label is provided, an `aria_label` must be provided to identify the control for accessibility purposes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The picker can be labeled using the `label` prop. If no label is provided, an `aria_label` must be provided to identify the control for accessibility purposes.

```

```python
from deephaven import ui

@ui.component
def ui_picker_help_text_examples():
    return [
        ui.picker(
            ui.section(ui.item("Option 1"), ui.item("Option 2"), title="Section 1"),
            label="Sample Label",
            description="Enter a comment.",
        ),
        ui.picker(
            ui.section(ui.item("Option 1"), ui.item("Option 2"), title="Section 1"),
            label="Sample Label",
            is_invalid=False,
            error_message="Sample invalid error message.",
        ),
        ui.picker(
            ui.section(ui.item("Option 1"), ui.item("Option 2"), title="Section 1"),
            label="Sample Label",
            is_invalid=True,
            error_message="Sample invalid error message.",
        ),
    ]

my_picker_help_text_examples = ui_picker_help_text_examples()
```

## Contextual help

Using the `contextual_help` prop, a `ui.contextual_help` can be placed next to the label to provide additional information about the picker.

```python
from deephaven import ui

picker_contextual_help_example = ui.picker(
    ui.section(ui.item("Option 1"), ui.item("Option 2"), title="Section 1"),
    label="Sample Label",

>     contextual_help=ui.contextual_help(ui.heading("Content tips")),

Reviewer 2: This might be a more API related question. Why does contextual_help here accept ui.contextual_help and not just a string or element?

Like couldn't I do:

```
ui.picker(
  ...
  contextual_help="my contextual help content"
  )
  
  @bmingles @mofojed

Author: I think your @ 's got included in the code snippet, so: @mofojed @bmingles 

I think we expect a Contextual Help there, to follow how Spectrum has it configured, they also have it so that you have to pass in a `<ContextualHelp>` into the `contextualHelp` prop, but maybe Brian or Bender can give some more context. 

https://react-spectrum.adobe.com/react-spectrum/Picker.html#contextual-help

Reviewer 3: I didn't implement anything special here, so whatever Spectrum supports should be what we support.

Reviewer 2: Ok. That would be outside this PR but I think we should support string | contextual_help and auto-wrap if it's a string like we do in other places like with ui.text.

            ),
            ui.picker(
                ui.section(ui.item("Option 1"), ui.item("Option 2"), title="Section 1"),

>                 direction="bottom",

Reviewer 3: This still doesn't seem to produce a different result (presumably due to there not being enough top space to go up). Maybe `direction="end"`?
